---
layout: post
title: Post B.Tech Career FAQs
tags: 
cover_url: https://apod.nasa.gov/apod/image/1812/NGC1365_HaLRGBpugh1024.jpg
cover_meta: 
  NGC 1365: Majestic Island Universe | NASA IMAGE OF THE DAY
color_scheme: tango
mathjax: true
mathjax: True
---

Going to compile a list of Questions I'm generally get asked or bashed about.

### Why did you go for GRE and not GATE?

For me personally, it was more of a lifestyle choice. I was always tempted to study in the states. I also had a keen interest in pursuing research, which faded away very quickly, thanks to the rigorous and tough coursework at Stony Brook. While I never really "prepared" for GRE, I always had it in back of my mind. Through my final year, my GRE Score, GPA and Profile were good enough to get me into many top 50 Computer Science Grad Programs across the US and the Europe. 

### I mean seriously, why not GATE ? I see people placed at XYZ with packages of ABC LPA 
I feel like IITs and IISc are good for undergrad, but because of lack of exposure and funding, they're not well suited for Graduate Programs. The quality of research is above and beyond in the US. And don't even get me started on Job Prospects - unlike India, where you are spoonfed with "campus placements", the US schools don't have such programs (there are Career Fairs and Campus Interviews, but you don't get a final offer on campus, you are just shortlisted. This gives people from different schools equal opportunity to apply for top jobs.). You have to work hard finding a job, and if you're worth it, you'll get one. There are no mass recruiters here, so it's not easy to get one. But if you do, it pays you much much better than what you'd earn in India. 

Basic rule of economics - _Higher The Risk, Higher The Returns_.

Another reason you get better jobs here is because of something called [_"Risk Compensation"_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk_compensation). It's a fun thing really, read about it. Because a lot is at stake when you're studying here, (Huge Loans, Visa Status, hell, even your Degree, and getting a Job) - you naturally feel more pressure and tend to perform better. Not to mention you'd face much more fierce competition here than at any IIT.


### Did you give GATE, did you get any calls?

Yes, I casually gave GATE and scored a very good rank considering the fact that I had only studied for it just a week or two. It wasn't something to be proud of, but my GATE result left me more surprised than my GRE Score. 

I was surprised to see how easy it was to get a good rank in GATE, and I cannot seem to understand why someone would need to go to a coaching centre for an exam like this. If you can't score amongst top 2000 in GATE in your first attempt without any coaching, you need to question what you want to be in your life, and whether you love what you're doing. Not everything is suited for everyone. Just because everyone is doing it doesn't mean you have to do it as well. Every individual is unique, think for yourselves! 


### Why MS and not MBA?

I am not here to answer stupid questions. Seriously, do what you want to. Don't just go on tailgating someone else.

### Will my lousy Undergrad GPA determine which school I get into?

Yes. Think of your 

