---
layout: post
title: Post B.Tech Career FAQs
tags: 
cover_url: https://github.com/alivcor/lightforest/raw/master/IMG_2716.JPG
cover_meta: The Majestic NYC Skyline in Summer (c) AD Photography
color_scheme: tango
mathjax: true
mathjax: True
---

Since I frequently get approached with a lot of career related questions, I have tried to compile an exhaustive list. 

_Disclaimer: I’m not a lawyer, an immigration advisor or a career consultant, so what follows is not legal advice. For those purposes, please contact a professional personnel. The advice here is very focused towards GRE, because that's the path I followed because I liked it. It might not be the case for you. I have no grudges against any person or any institution. All thoughts are my personal opinion._

_I'm a huge fan of many people, including Terry Tao. There's a comprehensive, much much better career advice blog series by him that can be found [here](https://terrytao.wordpress.com/career-advice/)._

### Why did you go for GRE and not GATE?
For me personally, it was more of a lifestyle choice. I was always tempted to study in the states. I also had a keen interest in pursuing research, which faded away very quickly, thanks to the rigorous and tough coursework at Stony Brook. While I never really "prepared" for GRE, I always had it in back of my mind. Through my final year, my GRE Score, GPA and Profile were good enough to get me into many top 50 Computer Science Grad Programs across the US and the Europe. 

### I mean seriously, why not GATE ? I see people placed at XYZ with packages of ABC LPA 
I feel like IITs and IISc are good for undergrad, but because of lack of exposure and funding, they're not well suited for Graduate Programs. The quality of research is above and beyond in the US. And don't even get me started on Job Prospects - unlike India, where you are spoonfed with "campus placements", the US schools don't have such programs (there are Career Fairs and Campus Interviews, but you don't get a final offer on campus, you are just shortlisted. This gives people from different schools equal opportunity to apply for top jobs.). You have to work hard finding a job, and if you're worth it, you'll get one. There are no mass recruiters here, so it's not easy to get one. But if you do, it pays you much much better than what you'd earn in India. 
Basic rule of economics - _Higher The Risk, Higher The Returns_.
Another reason you'd likely get a better job here is because of something called [_"Risk Compensation"_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk_compensation). It's a fun thing really, read about it. Because a lot is at stake when you're studying here, (Huge Loans, Visa Status, hell - even your degree, and getting a job) - you naturally feel more pressure and tend to perform better. Not to mention you'd face much more fierce competition here than at any IIT.


### Did you give GATE, did you get any calls?
Yes, I casually gave GATE and scored a very good rank considering the fact that I had only studied for it just a week or two. It wasn't something to be proud of, but my GATE result left me more surprised than my GRE Score. 
I was surprised to see how easy it was to get a good rank in GATE, and I cannot seem to understand why someone would need to go to a coaching centre for an exam like this. If you can't score amongst top 2000 in GATE in your first attempt without any coaching, you need to question what you want to be in your life, and whether you love what you're doing. Not everything is suited for everyone. Just because everyone is doing it doesn't mean you have to do it as well. Every individual is unique, think for yourselves! 


### Why MS and not MBA?
I am not here to answer stupid questions. Seriously, do what you want to. Don't just go on tailgating someone else.

### How important is my GPA in determining which schools I can get into?
Admission committees of top schools are smart enough to make out if the student has the history of sucking up at academics. When there are many applicants with similar GRE Scores, how would the adcom filter the applicants? This is where your undergraduate GPA comes to the rescue. The competition is more stiff at the universities which are among the top tier (ranked 20-60) and are cheaper as well. (MIT, Stanford etc will cost you approximately INR 60 Lacs a year without scholarship)


### Will my lousy Undergrad GPA determine which school I get into?
Yes. Think of your application packet as a briefcase with two Post-Its on it - your GRE Score, your Undergrad School, and your GPA. Inside that briefcase is everything else - your SoP, LoRs, Research Papers etc. The admissions committee receive thousands of applications and they cannot possibly go through every application meticulously. Most probably, they filter out based on your GRE Score and your GPA, and then bother reviewing rest of your application materials.

### How difficult is it to get into Top 50 US Schools?
Getting admitted to IITs and IISc is relatively easier than getting admitted to a top-50 US University for Masters programs. GRE is just a baby step into a distant journey to the school. There is a lot of labor and arduous paper-work in getting there. At the same time, getting admitted to tier-II, tier-III US university is easier or more or less similar to getting into IITs or IISc for masters. *Bachelors is a completely different story*.

### What kind of profile do I need to get into Top 50 US Schools?
Ideally, for top 50 universities, you need a percentage of > 75%, 1-2 research publications, a clearly outstanding Statement of Purpose, GRE Score >= 320 (out of 340), TOEFL Score > 105 (out of 120), decent LORs, and no history of backlogs, a clear record. Please note that your GRE Score is not an acceptance criteria - it is a rejection criteria. (Think)

### What kind of part-time jobs or scholarships are offered to international students?

Generally, no scholarships are offered to incoming G1 level students (Masters) students - unless it's offered to everyone (like RIT, UF and NYU Poly). You may work hard after coming to the US and impress a prof, get a TA or an RA. Scholarships, Waivers are generally only offered to incoming PhD students, unless you are an extraordinary student. 
You are not allowed to work in the United States until 9 months of your entry. If caught working, you'll be deported back to your home country and might be blacklisted, denying entry to United States for rest of your life. Law is enforced strictly in the US, unlike India. However, some part-time jobs are available and open to students after 9 months, depending upon the university. 
Top universities have a very intensive and stressful coursework and it's highly likely that you won't _get time for part-times. You may even end up screwing your GPA_. 

### Is it true that the US discriminates against International students?
Pure Hogwash. Indian and Chinese students fuel the US universities, augment their super-power economy and perpetuate their greatness. I feel the US is most welcoming and immigrant friendly country. 
However, you must be mindful of the US Visa regulations and the strict Immigration policy. Please keep in mind that if you earn a masters from an accredited US university, you may stay in the states, maintaining your F-1 status only for 12 months after your masters on an OPT. After that, you are expected to go back to your home country. If you wish to continue to work, you may request an OPT-Extension which entitles you a further stay of 17 months, if approved. After that, you lose your F-1 status, and you have to leave the United States. 
However, if your employer files an H1-B Petition for you, and you are lucky enough to win the H1-B lottery, you get a further stay of 3 years after your MS. (Keep the numbers in mind : On an average, US Department of Homeland Security receives around 2-3 lacs applications every year for H1-B and they randomly pick 65000 out of them for evaluation. These applications are then evaluated for LCA, Wage Levels, and you go through another visa interview. This whole process AFTER lottery selection alone has approval rates of 60-70%.)


### How much does it cost to apply for a Masters in the US.
I'd say approximately a 1000 USD, if you apply for 10 universities, give your GRE, TOEFL once. It's a commitment and requires a lot of perseverance.
Please note that you need a hell lot of hardwork and patience if you decide to go for your Masters in the US. You need to be highly detail oriented. Classes here are super tough <b>(No matter how hard I try to explain this part, you'd ignore it, so I would leave it at that - If you come to a top 50 school, passing courses is almost as getting 95%+ in 12th Standard in India / An AIR < 15,000 in the JEE - and hey - 75% is minimum passing "percentage", which is a "B" - and tread with caution, we have exams like <a href="https://www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/~rezaul/Spring-2014/CSE548/midterm.pdf" target="_blank">this</a></b>
You'll likely be taking on a huge loan and leaving your family's _hard-earned everything_ at stake. And there's no going back in middle of the process, once you apply, you have already wasted a good 1000 USD. 

- GRE Application Fees (Includes FREE Score Reporting to 4 colleges of your choice): INR 15,000/- 
- TOEFL Application Fees (Includes FREE Score Reporting to 4 colleges of your choice): INR 12,000/-
- Transcripts (10-12 sets) : INR 3000- 5000 (depends upon your university and the bribe they take)
- Application Fees for 10 universities (US$ 100 each) : INR 66,000/-
- Sending ASRs (Additional Score Reports) [US$ 27 each] of your GRE to 6 colleges (4 already covered in Free reports) : INR 11,000/-
- Sending ASRs (Additional Score Reports) [US$ 19 each] of your TOEFL to 6 colleges (4 already covered in Free reports): INR 8000/-
- Sending Application Packets by DHL to US (INR 1000 each): INR 10,000/-
- SubTotal for applying to 10 universities: INR 1,27,000/-

- Finally, if you get an admit from a university and decide to proceed with getting a visa from the Embassy of the United States:

- F-1 VISA Application Fees : $ 170 : INR 12,000/-
- SEVIS Fees :  $ 200 : INR 13,200/-
- University Tuition Fees : depends.

### How much does it cost to study in the US?
Expenses in USA (Public Universities): per year

- Tuition Fees per year : US$ 30,000 (Minimum, On an Average)
- Living Expenses (Food + Living) : US$ 15,000 (Minimum, On an Average, Sharing Apartments)
- Other Expenses (travel to India etc) and Fees : US$ 2000 (Minimum, On an Average)
- Total : US $ 47,000 per year = INR 30,00,000/- (Minimum) per year. Total MS cost (Assuming you graduate in 2 years) : INR 60,00,000 approx.

- For some public universities like Texas A&M University, Stony Brook University, UT Austin, cost is much lower. 
- For Private Universities (like Stanford, Harvard & MIT) , add INR 30,00,000 at least, if without scholarship.

### Any Preparation Materials?
Books & Online Resources:

Download (Both of them are freely available on the Internet):

- Official Guide to the Revised GRE by ETS (Easily available as PDF on net, you can also buy it from Amazon)
- Magoosh GRE eBook : http://magoosh.com/gre/gre-ebook/ 
Read the first few pages of "Official GRE Guide by ETS". You should get an idea of the test. Eg, there are 4 graded sections, 1 experimental section and 1 AWA section. The sections have a 1 Minute break in-between them. However, you also get an optional 10-minute break after first 3 sections (including AWA)
  - Familiarize yourself with the test completely. 

- Take a FREE GRE Litmus Test to get a very rough idea of your score : http://greio.com/

- Install "Magoosh Vocabulary Builder" and "Magoosh Vocabulary Flashcards" from Play Store. 

### When is the ideal time to apply for MS?
There are two semesters of admission. Fall (Semester Starting August) and Spring (Semester Starting Jan/Feb). Generally, intake is very low in Spring, so it is highly recommended to apply in Fall.

Eg, To apply for Fall 2019, give GRE & TOEFL by September 2018, and apply to all universities individually by December 2018.

### Where should I apply if I have a score of XYZ / How to choose universities?
Use [Edulix](http://www.edulix.com) and [GradMint](https://www.gradmint.com) for more details on selecting universities. GradMint can suggest universities based on your profile.

- Use [NRC (National Research Council)](https://www.stat.tamu.edu/~jnewton/nrc_rankings/area29.html) rankings to get true rankings. 

- DO NOT look at Times Higher Education / QS World Rankings / Shanghai Ranking as they are sponsored by Private Universities and are hence biased towards them.

- You can also use GradMint Rankings for Computer Science: [https://www.gradmint.com/rankings/](https://www.gradmint.com/rankings/) 

- Also interesting - [Google-based Ranking for Computer Science and Engineering Departments](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/rank.html)